## Abstract {.page_break_before}

**Instructions**: Describe your collaborative project, highlighting
key achievements of the project; limited to 250 words.

The HCA provides a reference atlas to human cell types, states, and
the biological processes in which they engage. The utility of the
reference therefore requires that one can easily compare references to
each other, or a new sample to the compendium of reference
samples. Low-dimensional representations, because they compress the
space, provide the building blocks for search approaches that can be
practically applied across very large datasets such as the HCA. 
Our seed network proposes to compress HCA data
into fewer dimensions that preserve the important attributes of the
original high dimensional data and yield interpretable, searchable
features.
We hypothesize that building an ensemble of low
dimensional representations across latent space methods will provide a
reduced dimensional space that captures biological sources of
variability and is robust to measurement noise.
We will identify techniques that learn interpretable,
biologically-aligned representations, improve techniques for fast and
accurate quantification, and implement these base enabling
technologies and methods for search, analysis, and latent space
transformations as freely available, open source software tools.
By using and extending our base enabling technologies, we will provide
three principle tools and resources for the HCA: 
1) software to enable fast and accurate search and annotation using
low-dimensional representations of cellular features, 
2) a versioned and annotated catalog of latent spaces corresponding to
signatures of cell types, states, and biological attributes across the
the HCA, and 
3) short course and educational materials that will increase the use
and impact of low-dimensional representations and the HCA in general.
